I. Preflight Preparation
Task A. Pilot Qualifications
References 14 CFR parts 61, 68, 91; FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-25; AC 68-1
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with airman and medical certificates including privileges, limitations, currency,
and operating as pilot-in-command (PIC) as a private pilot.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.I.A.K1 Certification requirements, recent flight experience, and recordkeeping.
PA.I.A.K2 Privileges and limitations.
PA.I.A.K3 Medical certificates: class, expiration, privileges, temporary disqualifications.
PA.I.A.K4 Documents required to exercise private pilot privileges.
PA.I.A.K5 Part 68 BasicMed privileges and limitations.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.I.A.R1 Failure to distinguish proficiency versus currency.
PA.I.A.R2 Flying unfamiliar airplanes, or operating with unfamiliar flight display systems, and
avionics.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.I.A.S1 Apply requirements to act as PIC under Visual Flight Rules (VFR) in a scenario given by
the evaluator.I. Preflight Preparation
4
Task B. Airworthiness Requirements
References 14 CFR parts 39, 43, 91; FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-25
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with airworthiness requirements, including airplane certificates.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.I.B.K1 General airworthiness requirements and compliance for airplanes, including:
PA.I.B.K1a a. Certificate location and expiration dates
PA.I.B.K1b b. Required inspections and airplane logbook documentation
PA.I.B.K1c c. Airworthiness Directives and Special Airworthiness Information Bulletins
PA.I.B.K1d d. Purpose and procedure for obtaining a special flight permit
PA.I.B.K2 Pilot-performed preventive maintenance.
PA.I.B.K3 Equipment requirements for day and night VFR flight, to include:
PA.I.B.K3a a. Flying with inoperative equipment
PA.I.B.K3b b. Using an approved Minimum Equipment List (MEL)
PA.I.B.K3c c. Kinds of Operation Equipment List (KOEL)
PA.I.B.K3d d. Required discrepancy records or placards
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.I.B.R1 Inoperative equipment discovered prior to flight.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.I.B.S1 Locate and describe airplane airworthiness and registration information.
PA.I.B.S2 Determine the airplane is airworthy in a scenario given by the evaluator.
PA.I.B.S3 Apply appropriate procedures for operating with inoperative equipment in a scenario
given by the evaluator.I. Preflight Preparation
5
Task C. Weather Information
References 14 CFR part 91; FAA-H-8083-25; AC 00-6, AC 00-45, AC 00-54; AIM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with weather information for a flight under VFR.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.I.C.K1 Sources of weather data (e.g., National Weather Service, Flight Service) for flight
planning purposes.
PA.I.C.K2 Acceptable weather products and resources required for preflight planning, current and
forecast weather for departure, en route, and arrival phases of flight.
PA.I.C.K3
Meteorology applicable to the departure, en route, alternate, and destination under VFR
in Visual Meteorological Conditions (VMC) to include expected climate and hazardous
conditions such as:
PA.I.C.K3a a. Atmospheric composition and stability
PA.I.C.K3b b. Wind (e.g., crosswind, tailwind, windshear, mountain wave, etc.)
PA.I.C.K3c c. Temperature
PA.I.C.K3d d. Moisture/precipitation
PA.I.C.K3e e. Weather system formation, including air masses and fronts
PA.I.C.K3f f. Clouds
PA.I.C.K3g g. Turbulence
PA.I.C.K3h h. Thunderstorms and microbursts
PA.I.C.K3i i. Icing and freezing level information
PA.I.C.K3j j. Fog/mist
PA.I.C.K3k k. Frost
PA.I.C.K3l l. Obstructions to visibility (e.g., smoke, haze, volcanic ash, etc.)
PA.I.C.K4 Flight deck displays of digital weather and aeronautical information.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.I.C.R1 Factors involved in making the go/no-go and continue/divert decisions, to include:
PA.I.C.R1a a. Circumstances that would make diversion prudent
PA.I.C.R1b b. Personal weather minimums
PA.I.C.R1c c. Hazardous weather conditions to include known or forecast icing or turbulence aloft
PA.I.C.R2 Limitations of:
PA.I.C.R2a a. Onboard weather equipment
PA.I.C.R2b b. Aviation weather reports and forecasts
PA.I.C.R2c c. Inflight weather resources
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.I.C.S1 Use available aviation weather resources to obtain an adequate weather briefing.
PA.I.C.S2
Analyze the implications of at least three of the conditions listed in K3a through K3l
above, using actual weather or weather conditions in a scenario provided by the
evaluator.
PA.I.C.S3 Correlate weather information to make a competent go/no-go decision.I. Preflight Preparation
6
Task D. Cross-Country Flight Planning
References 14 CFR part 91; FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-25; Navigation Charts; Chart Supplements;
AIM; NOTAMs
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with cross-country flights and VFR flight planning.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.I.D.K1
Route planning, including consideration of different classes and special use airspace
(SUA) and selection of appropriate and available navigation/communication systems and
facilities.
PA.I.D.K2 Altitude selection accounting for terrain and obstacles, glide distance of the airplane, VFR
cruising altitudes, and the effect of wind.
PA.I.D.K3 Calculating:
PA.I.D.K3a a. Time, climb and descent rates, course, distance, heading, true airspeed, and
groundspeed
PA.I.D.K3b b. Estimated time of arrival to include conversion to universal coordinated time (UTC)
PA.I.D.K3c c. Fuel requirements, to include reserve
PA.I.D.K4 Elements of a VFR flight plan.
PA.I.D.K5 Procedures for activating and closing a VFR flight plan.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.I.D.R1 Pilot.
PA.I.D.R2 Aircraft.
PA.I.D.R3 Environment (e.g., weather, airports, airspace, terrain, obstacles).
PA.I.D.R4 External pressures.
PA.I.D.R5 Limitations of air traffic control (ATC) services.
PA.I.D.R6 Improper fuel planning.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.I.D.S1 Prepare, present, and explain a cross-country flight plan assigned by the evaluator
including a risk analysis based on real-time weather, to the first fuel stop.
PA.I.D.S2
Apply pertinent information from appropriate and current aeronautical charts, Chart
Supplements; NOTAMs relative to airport, runway and taxiway closures; and other flight
publications.
PA.I.D.S3 Create a navigation plan and simulate filing a VFR flight plan.
PA.I.D.S4 Recalculate fuel reserves based on a scenario provided by the evaluator.I. Preflight Preparation
7
Task E. National Airspace System
References 14 CFR parts 71, 91, 93; FAA-H-8083-2; Navigation Charts; AIM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with the National Airspace System (NAS) operating under VFR as a private pilot.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.I.E.K1 Types of airspace/airspace classes and associated requirements and limitations.
PA.I.E.K2 Charting symbology.
PA.I.E.K3 Special use airspace (SUA), special flight rules areas (SFRA), temporary flight restrictions
(TFR), and other airspace areas.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.I.E.R1 Various classes and types of airspace.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.I.E.S1 Identify and comply with the requirements for basic VFR weather minimums and flying in
particular classes of airspace.
PA.I.E.S2 Correctly identify airspace and operate in accordance with associated communication and
equipment requirements.
PA.I.E.S3 Identify the requirements for operating in SUA or within a TFR. Identify and comply with
SATR and SFRA operations, if applicable.I. Preflight Preparation
8
Task F. Performance and Limitations
References FAA-H-8083-1, FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-25; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with operating an airplane safely within the parameters of its performance
capabilities and limitations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.I.F.K1 Elements related to performance and limitations by explaining the use of charts, tables,
and data to determine performance.
PA.I.F.K2 Factors affecting performance, to include:
PA.I.F.K2a a. Atmospheric conditions
PA.I.F.K2b b. Pilot technique
PA.I.F.K2c c. Airplane configuration
PA.I.F.K2d d. Airport environment
PA.I.F.K2e e. Loading (e.g., center of gravity)
PA.I.F.K2f f. Weight and balance
PA.I.F.K3 Aerodynamics.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.I.F.R1 Inaccurate use of manufacturer’s performance charts, tables, and data.
PA.I.F.R2 Exceeding airplane limitations.
PA.I.F.R3 Possible differences between calculated performance and actual performance.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.I.F.S1 Compute the weight and balance, correct out-of-center of gravity (CG) loading errors and
determine if the weight and balance remains within limits during all phases of flight.
PA.I.F.S2 Utilize the appropriate airplane manufacturer’s approved performance charts, tables, and
data.I. Preflight Preparation
9
Task G. Operation of Systems
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-23, FAA-H-8083-25; POH/AFM.
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with the safe operation of systems on the airplane provided for the flight test.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.I.G.K1
Airplane systems, to include:
Note: If K1 is selected, the evaluator must assess the applicant’ s knowledge of at least
three of the following sub-elements.
PA.I.G.K1a a. Primary flight controls
PA.I.G.K1b b. Secondary flight controls
PA.I.G.K1c c. Powerplant and propeller
PA.I.G.K1d d. Landing gear
PA.I.G.K1e e. Fuel, oil, and hydraulic
PA.I.G.K1f f. Electrical
PA.I.G.K1g g. Avionics
PA.I.G.K1h h. Pitot-static, vacuum/pressure, and associated flight instruments
PA.I.G.K1i i. Environmental
PA.I.G.K1j j. Deicing and anti-icing
PA.I.G.K1k k. Water rudders (ASES, AMES)
PA.I.G.K1l l. Oxygen system
PA.I.G.K2 Indications of and procedures for managing system abnormalities or failures.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.I.G.R1 Failure to detect system malfunctions or failures.
PA.I.G.R2 Improper management of a system failure.
PA.I.G.R3 Failure to monitor and manage automated systems.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.I.G.S1 Operate at least three of the systems listed in K1a through K1l above appropriately.
PA.I.G.S2 Use appropriate checklists properly.I. Preflight Preparation
10
Task H. Human Factors
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-25; AIM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with personal health, flight physiology, aeromedical and human factors, as it
relates to safety of flight.
Note: See Appendix 6: Safety of Flight.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.I.H.K1 The symptoms (as applicable), recognition, causes, effects, and corrective actions
associated with aeromedical and physiological issues including:
PA.I.H.K1a a. Hypoxia
PA.I.H.K1b b. Hyperventilation
PA.I.H.K1c c. Middle ear and sinus problems
PA.I.H.K1d d. Spatial disorientation
PA.I.H.K1e e. Motion sickness
PA.I.H.K1f f. Carbon monoxide poisoning
PA.I.H.K1g g. Stress
PA.I.H.K1h h. Fatigue
PA.I.H.K1i i. Dehydration and nutrition
PA.I.H.K1j j. Hypothermia
PA.I.H.K1k k. Optical illusions
PA.I.H.K1l l. Dissolved nitrogen in the bloodstream after scuba dives
PA.I.H.K2 Regulations regarding use of alcohol and drugs.
PA.I.H.K3 Effects of alcohol, drugs, and over-the-counter medications.
PA.I.H.K4 Aeronautical Decision-Making (ADM).
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks encompassing:
PA.I.H.R1 Aeromedical and physiological issues.
PA.I.H.R2 Hazardous attitudes.
PA.I.H.R3 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.I.H.S1 Associate the symptoms and effects for at least three of the conditions listed in K1a
through K1l above with the cause(s) and corrective action(s).
PA.I.H.S2 Perform self-assessment, including fitness for flight and personal minimums, for actual
flight or a scenario given by the evaluator.I. Preflight Preparation
11
Task I. Water and Seaplane Characteristics, Seaplane Bases, Maritime Rules, and Aids to
Marine Navigation (ASES, AMES)
References
FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-23; AIM; USCG Navigation Rules, International-Inland;
POH/AFM; Chart Supplements
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with water and seaplane characteristics, seaplane bases, maritime rules, and
aids to marine navigation.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.I.I.K1 The characteristics of a water surface as affected by features, such as:
PA.I.I.K1a a. Size and location
PA.I.I.K1b b. Protected and unprotected areas
PA.I.I.K1c c. Surface wind
PA.I.I.K1d d. Direction and strength of water current
PA.I.I.K1e e. Floating and partially submerged debris
PA.I.I.K1f f. Sandbars, islands, and shoals
PA.I.I.K1g g. Vessel traffic and wakes
PA.I.I.K1h h. Other characteristics specific to the area
PA.I.I.K2 Float and hull construction, and its effect on seaplane performance.
PA.I.I.K3 Causes of porpoising and skipping, and the pilot action needed to prevent or correct
these occurrences.
PA.I.I.K4 How to locate and identify seaplane bases on charts or in directories.
PA.I.I.K5 Operating restrictions at various bases.
PA.I.I.K6 Right-of-way, steering, and sailing rules pertinent to seaplane operation.
PA.I.I.K7 Marine navigation aids, such as buoys, beacons, lights, sound signals, and range
markers.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.I.I.R1 Local conditions.
PA.I.I.R2 Impact of marine traffic.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.I.I.S1 Assess the water surface characteristics for the proposed flight.
PA.I.I.S2 Identify restrictions at local seaplane bases.
PA.I.I.S3 Identify marine navigation aids.
PA.I.I.S4 Perform correct right-of-way, steering, and sailing operations.12
II. Preflight Procedures
Task A. Preflight Assessment
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-23; POH/AFM; AC 00-6
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with preparing for safe flight.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.II.A.K1 Pilot self-assessment.
PA.II.A.K2 Determining that the airplane to be used is appropriate and airworthy.
PA.II.A.K3 Airplane preflight inspection including:
PA.II.A.K3a a. Which items must be inspected
PA.II.A.K3b b. The reasons for checking each item
PA.II.A.K3c c. How to detect possible defects
PA.II.A.K3d d. The associated regulations
PA.II.A.K4 Environmental factors including weather, terrain, route selection, and obstructions.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.II.A.R1 Pilot.
PA.II.A.R2 Aircraft.
PA.II.A.R3 Environment (e.g., weather, airports, airspace, terrain, obstacles).
PA.II.A.R4 External pressures.
PA.II.A.R5 Aviation security concerns.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.II.A.S1 Inspect the airplane with reference to an appropriate checklist.
PA.II.A.S2 Verify the airplane is in condition for safe flight and conforms to its type design.II. Preflight Procedures
13
Task B. Flight Deck Management
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; AC 120-71; POH/AFM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with safe flight deck management practices.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.II.B.K1 Passenger briefing requirements, to include operation and required use of safety restraint
systems.
PA.II.B.K2 Use of appropriate checklists.
PA.II.B.K3 Requirements for current and appropriate navigation data.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.II.B.R1 Improper use of systems or equipment, to include automation and portable electronic
devices.
PA.II.B.R2 Flying with unresolved discrepancies.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.II.B.S1 Secure all items in the flight deck and cabin.
PA.II.B.S2 Conduct an appropriate pre-takeoff briefing, to include identifying the PIC, use of safety
belts, shoulder harnesses, doors, sterile flight deck, and emergency procedures.
PA.II.B.S3 Program and manage the airplane’s automation properly.II. Preflight Procedures
14
Task C. Engine Starting
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-25; POH/AFM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with recommended engine starting procedures.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.II.C.K1 Starting under various conditions.
PA.II.C.K2 Starting the engine(s) by use of external power.
PA.II.C.K3 Engine limitations as they relate to starting.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.II.C.R1 Propeller safety.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.II.C.S1 Position the airplane properly considering structures, other aircraft, wind, and the safety
of nearby persons and property.
PA.II.C.S2 Complete the appropriate checklist.II. Preflight Procedures
15
Task D. Taxiing (ASEL, AMEL)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-25; POH/AFM; AC 91-73; Chart Supplements;
AIM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with safe taxi operations, including runway incursion avoidance.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.II.D.K1 Current airport aeronautical references and information resources such as the Chart
Supplement, airport diagram, and NOTAMS.
PA.II.D.K2 Taxi instructions/clearances.
PA.II.D.K3 Airport markings, signs, and lights.
PA.II.D.K4 Visual indicators for wind.
PA.II.D.K5 Aircraft lighting.
PA.II.D.K6 Procedures for:
PA.II.D.K6a a. Appropriate flight deck activities prior to taxi, including route planning and identifying
the location of Hot Spots
PA.II.D.K6b b. Radio communications at towered and nontowered airports
PA.II.D.K6c c. Entering or crossing runways
PA.II.D.K6d d. Night taxi operations
PA.II.D.K6e e. Low visibility taxi operations
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.II.D.R1 Inappropriate activities and distractions.
PA.II.D.R2 Confirmation or expectation bias as related to taxi instructions.
PA.II.D.R3 A taxi route or departure runway change.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.II.D.S1 Receive and correctly read back clearances/instructions, if applicable.
PA.II.D.S2 Use an airport diagram or taxi chart during taxi, if published, and maintain situational
awareness.
PA.II.D.S3 Position the flight controls for the existing wind.
PA.II.D.S4 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.II.D.S5 Perform a brake check immediately after the airplane begins moving.
PA.II.D.S6 Maintain positive control of the airplane during ground operations by controlling direction
and speed without excessive use of brakes.
PA.II.D.S7 Comply with airport/taxiway markings, signals, and ATC clearances and instructions.
PA.II.D.S8 Position the airplane properly relative to hold lines.II. Preflight Procedures
16
Task E. Taxiing and Sailing (ASES, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-23, FAA-H-8083-25; POH/AFM; AC 91-73; Chart Supplements;
AIM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with safe taxiing and sailing operations, including runway incursion avoidance.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.II.E.K1 Airport information resources including Chart Supplements, airport diagram, and
appropriate references.
PA.II.E.K2 Taxi instructions/clearances.
PA.II.E.K3 Airport/seaplane base markings, signs, and lights.
PA.II.E.K4 Visual indicators for wind.
PA.II.E.K5 Airplane lighting.
PA.II.E.K6 Procedures for:
PA.II.E.K6a a. Appropriate flight deck activities during taxiing or sailing
PA.II.E.K6b b. Radio communications at towered and nontowered seaplane bases
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.II.E.R1 Inappropriate activities and distractions.
PA.II.E.R2 Porpoising and skipping.
PA.II.E.R3 Low visibility taxi and sailing operations.
PA.II.E.R4 Other aircraft, vessels, and hazards.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.II.E.S1 Receive and correctly read back clearances/instructions, if applicable.
PA.II.E.S2 Use an appropriate diagram or chart during taxi, if published.
PA.II.E.S3 Comply with seaplane base/airport/taxiway markings, signals, and signs.
PA.II.E.S4 Depart the dock/mooring buoy or beach/ramp in a safe manner, considering wind,
current, traffic, and hazards.
PA.II.E.S5 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.II.E.S6
Position the flight controls, flaps, doors, water rudders, and power correctly for the
existing conditions to follow the desired course while sailing and to prevent or correct for
porpoising and skipping during step taxi.
PA.II.E.S7
Exhibit procedures for steering and maneuvering while maintaining proper situational
awareness and desired orientation, path, and position while taxiing using idle, plow, or
step taxi technique, as appropriate.
PA.II.E.S8 Plan and follow the most favorable taxi or sailing course for current conditions.
PA.II.E.S9 Abide by right-of-way rules, maintain positive airplane control, proper speed, and
separation between other aircraft, vessels, and persons.
PA.II.E.S10 Comply with applicable taxi elements in Task D if the practical test is conducted in an
amphibious airplane.II. Preflight Procedures
17
Task F. Before Takeoff Check
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-23; POH/AFM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with the before takeoff check.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.II.F.K1 Purpose of pre-takeoff checklist items including:
PA.II.F.K1a a. Reasons for checking each item
PA.II.F.K1b b. Detecting malfunctions
PA.II.F.K1c c. Ensuring the airplane is in safe operating condition as recommended by the
manufacturer
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.II.F.R1 Division of attention while conducting pre-flight checks.
PA.II.F.R2 Unexpected runway changes by ATC.
PA.II.F.R3 Wake turbulence.
PA.II.F.R4
A powerplant failure during takeoff or other malfunction considering operational factors
such as airplane characteristics, runway/takeoff path length, surface conditions,
environmental conditions, and obstructions.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.II.F.S1 Review takeoff performance.
PA.II.F.S2 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.II.F.S3 Position the airplane appropriately considering other aircraft, vessels, and wind.
PA.II.F.S4 Divide attention inside and outside the flight deck.
PA.II.F.S5 Verify that engine parameters and airplane configuration are suitable.18
III. Airport and Seaplane Base Operations
Task A. Communications, Light Signals, and Runway Lighting Systems
References 14 CFR part 91; FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-25; AIM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with normal and emergency radio communications, ATC light signals, and
runway lighting systems to conduct safe airport operations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.III.A.K1 How to obtain proper radio frequencies.
PA.III.A.K2 Proper radio communication procedures and ATC phraseology.
PA.III.A.K3 ATC light signal recognition.
PA.III.A.K4 Appropriate use of transponders.
PA.III.A.K5 Lost communication procedures.
PA.III.A.K6 Equipment issues that could cause loss of communication.
PA.III.A.K7 Radar assistance.
PA.III.A.K8 National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) accident/incident reporting.
PA.III.A.K9 Runway Status Lighting Systems.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.III.A.R1 Poor communication.
PA.III.A.R2 Failure to recognize and declare an emergency.
PA.III.A.R3 Confirmation or expectation bias.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.III.A.S1 Select appropriate frequencies.
PA.III.A.S2 Transmit using phraseology and procedures as specified in the AIM.
PA.III.A.S3 Acknowledge radio communications and comply with instructions.III. Airport and Seaplane Base Operations
19
Task B. Traffic Patterns
References 14 CFR part 91; FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-25; AIM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with traffic patterns.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.III.B.K1 Towered and nontowered airport operations.
PA.III.B.K2 Runway selection for the current conditions.
PA.III.B.K3 Right-of-way rules.
PA.III.B.K4 Use of automated weather and airport information.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.III.B.R1 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.III.B.R2 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.III.B.R3 Wake turbulence or windshear.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.III.B.S1 Identify and interpret airport/seaplane base runways, taxiways, markings, signs, and
lighting.
PA.III.B.S2 Comply with recommended traffic pattern procedures.
PA.III.B.S3 Correct for wind drift to maintain the proper ground track.
PA.III.B.S4 Maintain orientation with the runway/landing area in use.
PA.III.B.S5 Maintain traffic pattern altitude, ±100 feet, and the appropriate airspeed, ±10 knots.
PA.III.B.S6 Maintain situational awareness and proper spacing from other aircraft in the traffic pattern.20
IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
Task A. Normal Takeoff and Climb
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-23; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a normal takeoff, climb operations, and rejected takeoff procedures.
Note: If a crosswind condition does not exist, the applicant’s knowledge of crosswind
elements must be evaluated through oral testing.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.A.K1 Effects of atmospheric conditions, including wind, on takeoff and climb performance.
PA.IV.A.K2 VX and VY.
PA.IV.A.K3 Appropriate airplane configuration.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.A.R1 Selection of runway based on pilot capability, airplane performance and limitations,
available distance, and wind.
PA.IV.A.R2 Effects of:
PA.IV.A.R2a a. Crosswind
PA.IV.A.R2b b. Windshear
PA.IV.A.R2c c. Tailwind
PA.IV.A.R2d d. Wake turbulence
PA.IV.A.R2e e. Runway surface/condition
PA.IV.A.R3 Abnormal operations, to include planning for:
PA.IV.A.R3a a. Rejected takeoff
PA.IV.A.R3b b. Engine failure in takeoff/climb phase of flight
PA.IV.A.R4 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vehicles, vessels, persons,
and wildlife.
PA.IV.A.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.A.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.A.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.A.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.A.S3 Verify assigned/correct runway.
PA.IV.A.S4 Ascertain wind direction with or without visible wind direction indicators.
PA.IV.A.S5 Position the flight controls for the existing wind.
PA.IV.A.S6 Clear the area; taxi into takeoff position and align the airplane on the runway centerline
(ASEL, AMEL) or takeoff path (ASES, AMES).
PA.IV.A.S7 Confirm takeoff power and proper engine and flight instrument indications prior to rotation
(ASEL, AMEL).
PA.IV.A.S8 Avoid excessive water spray on the propeller(s) (ASES, AMES).
PA.IV.A.S9 Rotate and lift off at the recommended airspeed and accelerate to VY.
PA.IV.A.S10 Retract the water rudders, as appropriate, establish and maintain the most efficient
planing/liftoff attitude, and correct for porpoising and skipping (ASES, AMES).
PA.IV.A.S11 Establish a pitch attitude to maintain the manufacturer’s recommended speed or VY,
+10/-5 knots.
PA.IV.A.S12 Configure the airplane in accordance with manufacturer’s guidance.
PA.IV.A.S13 Maintain VY +10/-5 knots to a safe maneuvering altitude.
PA.IV.A.S14 Maintain directional control and proper wind-drift correction throughout takeoff and climb.
PA.IV.A.S15 Comply with noise abatement procedures.IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
21
Task B. Normal Approach and Landing
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-23; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a normal approach and landing with emphasis on proper use of flight
controls.
Note: If a crosswind condition does not exist, the applicant’s knowledge of crosswind
elements must be evaluated through oral testing.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.B.K1 A stabilized approach, to include energy management concepts.
PA.IV.B.K2 Effects of atmospheric conditions, including wind, on approach and landing performance.
PA.IV.B.K3 Wind correction techniques on approach and landing.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.B.R1 Selection of runway or approach path and touchdown area based on pilot capability,
airplane performance and limitations, available distance, and wind.
PA.IV.B.R2 Effects of:
PA.IV.B.R2a a. Crosswind
PA.IV.B.R2b b. Windshear
PA.IV.B.R2c c. Tailwind
PA.IV.B.R2d d. Wake turbulence
PA.IV.B.R2e e. Runway surface/condition
PA.IV.B.R3 Planning for:
PA.IV.B.R3a a. Go-around and rejected landing
PA.IV.B.R3b b. Land and hold short operations (LAHSO)
PA.IV.B.R4 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vehicles, vessels, persons,
and wildlife.
PA.IV.B.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.B.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, incorrect airport surface approach and landing,
or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.B.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.B.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.B.S3 Ensure the airplane is aligned with the correct/assigned runway or landing surface.
PA.IV.B.S4 Scan runway or landing surface and the adjoining area for traffic and obstructions.
PA.IV.B.S5 Select and aim for a suitable touchdown point considering the wind, landing surface, and
obstructions.
PA.IV.B.S6 Establish the recommended approach and landing configuration and airspeed, and adjust
pitch attitude and power as required to maintain a stabilized approach.
PA.IV.B.S7 Maintain manufacturer’s published approach airspeed or in its absence not more than 1.3
VSO, +10/-5 knots with gust factor applied.
PA.IV.B.S8 Maintain directional control and appropriate crosswind correction throughout the approach
and landing.
PA.IV.B.S9 Make smooth, timely, and correct control application during round out and touchdown.
PA.IV.B.S10
Touch down at a proper pitch attitude, within 400 feet beyond or on the specified point,
with no side drift, and with the airplane’s longitudinal axis aligned with and over the
runway center/landing path.
PA.IV.B.S11
Execute a timely go-around if the approach cannot be made within the tolerances
specified above or for any other condition that may result in an unsafe approach or
landing.
PA.IV.B.S12 Utilize runway incursion avoidance procedures.IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
22IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
23
Task C. Soft-Field Takeoff and Climb (ASEL)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a soft-field takeoff, climb operations, and rejected takeoff procedures.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.C.K1 Effects of atmospheric conditions, including wind, on takeoff and climb performance.
PA.IV.C.K2 VX and VY.
PA.IV.C.K3 Appropriate airplane configuration.
PA.IV.C.K4 Ground effect.
PA.IV.C.K5 Importance of weight transfer from wheels to wings.
PA.IV.C.K6 Left turning tendencies.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.C.R1 Selection of runway based on pilot capability, airplane performance and limitations,
available distance, and wind.
PA.IV.C.R2 Effects of:
PA.IV.C.R2a a. Crosswind
PA.IV.C.R2b b. Windshear
PA.IV.C.R2c c. Tailwind
PA.IV.C.R2d d. Wake turbulence
PA.IV.C.R2e e. Runway surface/condition
PA.IV.C.R3 Abnormal operations, to include planning for:
PA.IV.C.R3a a. Rejected takeoff
PA.IV.C.R3b b. Engine failure in takeoff/climb phase of flight
PA.IV.C.R4 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vehicles, persons, and
wildlife.
PA.IV.C.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.C.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.C.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.C.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.C.S3 Verify assigned/correct runway.
PA.IV.C.S4 Ascertain wind direction with or without visible wind direction indicators.
PA.IV.C.S5 Position the flight controls for the existing wind.
PA.IV.C.S6
Clear the area, maintain necessary flight control inputs, taxi into takeoff position and align
the airplane on the runway centerline without stopping, while advancing the throttle
smoothly to takeoff power.
PA.IV.C.S7 Confirm takeoff power and proper engine and flight instrument indications.
PA.IV.C.S8 Establish and maintain a pitch attitude that will transfer the weight of the airplane from the
wheels to the wings as rapidly as possible.
PA.IV.C.S9 Lift off at the lowest possible airspeed and remain in ground effect while accelerating to VX
or VY, as appropriate.
PA.IV.C.S10 Establish a pitch attitude for VX or VY, as appropriate, and maintain selected airspeed
+10/-5 knots during the climb.
PA.IV.C.S11 Configure the airplane after a positive rate of climb has been verified or in accordance
with airplane manufacturer’s instructions.
PA.IV.C.S12 Maintain VX or VY, as appropriate, +10/-5 knots to a safe maneuvering altitude.
PA.IV.C.S13 Maintain directional control and proper wind-drift correction throughout takeoff and climb.
PA.IV.C.S14 Comply with noise abatement procedures.IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
24
Task D. Soft-Field Approach and Landing (ASEL)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a soft-field approach and landing with emphasis on proper use and
coordination of flight controls.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.D.K1 A stabilized approach, to include energy management concepts.
PA.IV.D.K2 Effects of atmospheric conditions, including wind, on approach and landing performance.
PA.IV.D.K3 Wind correction techniques on approach and landing.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.D.R1 Selection of runway based on pilot capability, airplane performance and limitations,
available distance, and wind.
PA.IV.D.R2 Effects of:
PA.IV.D.R2a a. Crosswind
PA.IV.D.R2b b. Windshear
PA.IV.D.R2c c. Tailwind
PA.IV.D.R2d d. Wake turbulence
PA.IV.D.R2e e. Runway surface/condition
PA.IV.D.R3 Planning for:
PA.IV.D.R3a a. Go-around and rejected landing
PA.IV.D.R3b b. Land and hold short operations (LAHSO)
PA.IV.D.R4 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vehicles, persons, and
wildlife.
PA.IV.D.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.D.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.D.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.D.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.D.S3 Ensure the airplane is aligned with the correct/assigned runway.
PA.IV.D.S4 Scan the landing runway and adjoining area for traffic and obstructions.
PA.IV.D.S5 Select and aim for a suitable touchdown point considering the wind, landing surface, and
obstructions.
PA.IV.D.S6 Establish the recommended approach and landing configuration and airspeed, and adjust
pitch attitude and power as required to maintain a stabilized approach.
PA.IV.D.S7 Maintain manufacturer’s published approach airspeed or in its absence not more than 1.3
VSO, +10/-5 knots with gust factor applied.
PA.IV.D.S8 Maintain directional control and appropriate crosswind correction throughout the approach
and landing.
PA.IV.D.S9
Make smooth, timely, and correct control inputs during the round out and touchdown, and,
for tricycle gear airplanes, keep the nose wheel off the surface until loss of elevator
effectiveness.
PA.IV.D.S10 Touch down at a proper pitch attitude with minimum sink rate, no side drift, and with the
airplane’s longitudinal axis aligned with the center of the runway.
PA.IV.D.S11 Maintain elevator as recommended by manufacturer during rollout and exit the “soft” area
at a speed that would preclude sinking into the surface.
PA.IV.D.S12 Execute a timely go-around if the approach cannot be made within the tolerances specified
above or for any other condition that may result in an unsafe approach or landing.
PA.IV.D.S13 Maintain proper position of the flight controls and sufficient speed to taxi while on the soft
surface.IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
25
Task E. Short-Field Takeoff and Maximum Performance Climb (ASEL, AMEL)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a short-field takeoff, maximum performance climb operations, and rejected
takeoff procedures.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.E.K1 Effects of atmospheric conditions, including wind, on takeoff and climb performance.
PA.IV.E.K2 VX and VY.
PA.IV.E.K3 Appropriate airplane configuration.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.E.R1 Selection of runway based on pilot capability, airplane performance and limitations,
available distance, and wind.
PA.IV.E.R2 Effects of:
PA.IV.E.R2a a. Crosswind
PA.IV.E.R2b b. Windshear
PA.IV.E.R2c c. Tailwind
PA.IV.E.R2d d. Wake turbulence
PA.IV.E.R2e e. Runway surface/condition
PA.IV.E.R3 Abnormal operations, to include planning for:
PA.IV.E.R3a a. Rejected takeoff
PA.IV.E.R3b b. Engine failure in takeoff/climb phase of flight
PA.IV.E.R4 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vehicles, persons, and
wildlife.
PA.IV.E.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.E.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.E.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.E.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.E.S3 Verify assigned/correct runway.
PA.IV.E.S4 Ascertain wind direction with or without visible wind direction indicators.
PA.IV.E.S5 Position the flight controls for the existing wind.
PA.IV.E.S6 Clear the area, taxi into takeoff position and align the airplane on the runway centerline
utilizing maximum available takeoff area.
PA.IV.E.S7 Apply brakes while setting engine power to achieve maximum performance.
PA.IV.E.S8 Confirm takeoff power prior to brake release and verify proper engine and flight
instrument indications prior to rotation.
PA.IV.E.S9 Rotate and lift off at the recommended airspeed and accelerate to the recommended
obstacle clearance airspeed or VX, +10/-5 knots.
PA.IV.E.S10
Establish a pitch attitude that will maintain the recommended obstacle clearance airspeed
or VX, +10/-5 knots until clearing the obstacle or until the airplane is 50 feet above the
surface.
PA.IV.E.S11 Establish a pitch attitude for VY and accelerate to VY+10/-5 knots after clearing the
obstacle or at 50 feet AGL if simulating an obstacle.
PA.IV.E.S12 Configure the airplane in accordance with the manufacturer’s guidance after a positive
rate of climb has been verified.
PA.IV.E.S13 Maintain VY +10/-5 knots to a safe maneuvering altitude.
PA.IV.E.S14 Maintain directional control and proper wind-drift correction throughout takeoff and climb.
PA.IV.E.S15 Comply with noise abatement procedures.IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
26
Task F. Short-Field Approach and Landing (ASEL, AMEL)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a short-field approach and landing with emphasis on proper use and
coordination of flight controls.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.F.K1 A stabilized approach, to include energy management concepts.
PA.IV.F.K2 Effects of atmospheric conditions, including wind, on approach and landing performance.
PA.IV.F.K3 Wind correction techniques on approach and landing.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.F.R1 Selection of runway based on pilot capability, airplane performance and limitations,
available distance, and wind.
PA.IV.F.R2 Effects of:
PA.IV.F.R2a a. Crosswind
PA.IV.F.R2b b. Windshear
PA.IV.F.R2c c. Tailwind
PA.IV.F.R2d d. Wake turbulence
PA.IV.F.R2e e. Runway surface/condition
PA.IV.F.R3 Planning for:
PA.IV.F.R3a a. Go-around and rejected landing
PA.IV.F.R3b b. Land and hold short operations (LAHSO)
PA.IV.F.R4 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vehicles, persons, and
wildlife.
PA.IV.F.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.F.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.F.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.F.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.F.S3 Ensure the airplane is aligned with the correct/assigned runway.
PA.IV.F.S4 Scan the landing runway and adjoining area for traffic and obstructions.
PA.IV.F.S5 Select and aim for a suitable touchdown point considering the wind, landing surface, and
obstructions.
PA.IV.F.S6 Establish the recommended approach and landing configuration and airspeed, and adjust
pitch attitude and power as required to maintain a stabilized approach.
PA.IV.F.S7 Maintain manufacturer’s published approach airspeed or in its absence not more than 1.3
VSO, +10/-5 knots with gust factor applied.
PA.IV.F.S8 Maintain directional control and appropriate crosswind correction throughout the approach
and landing.
PA.IV.F.S9 Make smooth, timely, and correct control application during the round out and touchdown.
PA.IV.F.S10
Touch down at a proper pitch attitude within 200 feet beyond or on the specified point,
threshold markings, or runway numbers, with no side drift, minimum float, and with the
airplane’s longitudinal axis aligned with and over runway centerline.
PA.IV.F.S11 Use manufacturer’s recommended procedures for airplane configuration and braking.
PA.IV.F.S12
Execute a timely go-around if the approach cannot be made within the tolerances
specified above or for any other condition that may result in an unsafe approach or
landing.
PA.IV.F.S13 Utilize runway incursion avoidance procedures.IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
27
Task G. Confined Area Takeoff and Maximum Performance Climb (ASES, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-23; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a confined area takeoff, and maximum performance climb operations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.G.K1 Effects of atmospheric conditions, including wind, on takeoff and climb performance.
PA.IV.G.K2 VX and VY.
PA.IV.G.K3 Appropriate airplane configuration.
PA.IV.G.K4 Effects of water surface.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.G.R1 Selection of takeoff path based on pilot capability, airplane performance and limitations,
available distance, and wind.
PA.IV.G.R2 Effects of:
PA.IV.G.R2a a. Crosswind
PA.IV.G.R2b b. Windshear
PA.IV.G.R2c c. Tailwind
PA.IV.G.R2d d. Wake turbulence
PA.IV.G.R2e e. Water surface/condition
PA.IV.G.R3 Abnormal operations, to include planning for:
PA.IV.G.R3a a. Rejected takeoff
PA.IV.G.R3b b. Engine failure in takeoff/climb phase of flight
PA.IV.G.R4 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vessels, persons, and
wildlife.
PA.IV.G.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.G.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.G.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.G.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.G.S3 Verify assigned/correct takeoff path.
PA.IV.G.S4 Ascertain wind direction with or without visible wind direction indicators.
PA.IV.G.S5 Position the flight controls for the existing wind.
PA.IV.G.S6 Clear the area, taxi into takeoff position utilizing maximum available takeoff area and align
the airplane on the takeoff path.
PA.IV.G.S7 Confirm takeoff power and proper engine and flight instrument indications prior to rotation.
PA.IV.G.S8 Establish a pitch attitude that maintains the most efficient planing/liftoff attitude and
correct for porpoising and skipping.
PA.IV.G.S9 Avoid excessive water spray on the propeller(s).
PA.IV.G.S10 Rotate and liftoff at the recommended airspeed, and accelerate to the recommended
obstacle clearance airspeed or VX.
PA.IV.G.S11
Establish a pitch attitude that will maintain the recommended obstacle clearance airspeed
or VX, +10/-5 knots until the obstacle is cleared or until the airplane is 50 feet above the
surface.
PA.IV.G.S12 Establish a pitch attitude for VY and accelerate to VY +10/-5 knots after clearing the
obstacle or at 50 feet AGL if simulating an obstacle.
PA.IV.G.S13 Retract flaps, if extended, after a positive rate of climb has been verified or in accordance
with airplane manufacturer’s guidance.
PA.IV.G.S14 Maintain VY +10/-5 knots to a safe maneuvering altitude.
PA.IV.G.S15 Maintain directional control and proper wind-drift correction throughout takeoff and climb.
PA.IV.G.S16 Comply with noise abatement procedures.IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
28
Task H. Confined Area Approach and Landing (ASES, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-23; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a confined area approach and landing.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.H.K1 A stabilized approach, to include energy management concepts.
PA.IV.H.K2 Effects of atmospheric conditions, including wind, on approach and landing performance.
PA.IV.H.K3 Wind correction techniques on approach and landing.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.H.R1 Selection of approach path and touchdown area based on pilot capability, airplane
performance and limitations, available distance, and wind.
PA.IV.H.R2 Effects of:
PA.IV.H.R2a a. Crosswind
PA.IV.H.R2b b. Windshear
PA.IV.H.R2c c. Tailwind
PA.IV.H.R2d d. Wake turbulence
PA.IV.H.R2e e. Water surface/condition
PA.IV.H.R3 Planning for a go-around and rejected landing.
PA.IV.H.R4 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vessels, persons, and
wildlife.
PA.IV.H.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.H.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.H.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.H.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.H.S3 Ensure the airplane is aligned for an approach to the correct/assigned landing surface.
PA.IV.H.S4 Scan the landing area for traffic and obstructions.
PA.IV.H.S5 Select and aim for a suitable touchdown point considering the wind, landing surface, and
obstructions.
PA.IV.H.S6 Establish the recommended approach and landing configuration and airspeed, and adjust
pitch attitude and power as required to maintain a stabilized approach.
PA.IV.H.S7 Maintain manufacturer’s published approach airspeed or in its absence not more than 1.3
VSO, +10/-5 knots with gust factor applied.
PA.IV.H.S8 Maintain directional control and appropriate crosswind correction throughout the approach
and landing, as required.
PA.IV.H.S9 Make smooth, timely, and correct control application during the round out and touchdown.
PA.IV.H.S10 Contact the water at the recommended airspeed with a proper pitch attitude for the
surface conditions.
PA.IV.H.S11
Touch down at a proper pitch attitude, within 200 feet beyond or on the specified point,
with no side drift, minimum float, and with the airplane’s longitudinal axis aligned with the
projected landing path.
PA.IV.H.S12
Execute a timely go-around if the approach cannot be made within the tolerances
specified above or for any other condition that may result in an unsafe approach or
landing.
PA.IV.H.S13 Apply elevator control as necessary to stop in the shortest distance consistent with safety.IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
29
Task I. Glassy Water Takeoff and Climb (ASES, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-23; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a glassy water takeoff and climb.
Note: If a glassy water condition does not exist, the applicant must be evaluated by
simulating the Task.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.I.K1 Effects of atmospheric conditions, including wind, on takeoff and climb performance.
PA.IV.I.K2 VX and VY.
PA.IV.I.K3 Appropriate airplane configuration.
PA.IV.I.K4 Appropriate use of glassy water takeoff and climb technique.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.I.R1 Selection of takeoff path based on pilot capability, airplane performance and limitations,
and available distance.
PA.IV.I.R2 Water surface/condition.
PA.IV.I.R3 Abnormal operations, to include planning for:
PA.IV.I.R3a a. Rejected takeoff
PA.IV.I.R3b b. Engine failure in takeoff/climb phase of flight
PA.IV.I.R4 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vessels, persons, and
wildlife.
PA.IV.I.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.I.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.IV.I.R7 Failure to confirm gear position in an amphibious airplane.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.I.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.I.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.I.S3 Position flight controls and flaps for the existing conditions.
PA.IV.I.S4 Clear the area; select appropriate takeoff path considering surface hazards or vessels
and surface conditions.
PA.IV.I.S5 Retract the water rudders as appropriate; advance the throttle smoothly to takeoff power.
PA.IV.I.S6 Establish and maintain an appropriate planing attitude, directional control, and correct for
porpoising, skipping, and increase in water drag.
PA.IV.I.S7 Avoid excessive water spray on the propeller(s).
PA.IV.I.S8 Utilize appropriate techniques to lift seaplane from the water considering surface
conditions.
PA.IV.I.S9 Establish proper attitude/airspeed and accelerate to VY +10/-5 knots during the climb.
PA.IV.I.S10 Configure the airplane after a positive rate of climb has been verified or in accordance
with airplane manufacturer’s instructions.
PA.IV.I.S11 Maintain VY +10/-5 knots to a safe maneuvering altitude.
PA.IV.I.S12 Maintain directional control throughout takeoff and climb.IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
30
Task J. Glassy Water Approach and Landing (ASES, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-23; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a glassy water approach and landing.
Note: If a glassy water condition does not exist, the applicant must be evaluated by
simulating the Task.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.J.K1 A stabilized approach, to include energy management concepts.
PA.IV.J.K2 Effects of atmospheric conditions on approach and landing performance.
PA.IV.J.K3 When and why glassy water techniques are used.
PA.IV.J.K4 How a glassy water approach and landing is executed.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.J.R1 Selection of approach path and touchdown area based on pilot capability, airplane
performance and limitations, and available distance.
PA.IV.J.R2 Water surface/condition.
PA.IV.J.R3 Planning for go-around and rejected landing.
PA.IV.J.R4 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vessels, persons, and
wildlife.
PA.IV.J.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.J.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.IV.J.R7 Failure to confirm gear position in an amphibious airplane.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.J.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.J.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.J.S3 Scan the landing area for traffic and obstructions.
PA.IV.J.S4 Select a proper approach and landing path considering the landing surface, visual attitude
references, water depth, and collision hazards.
PA.IV.J.S5 Establish the recommended approach and landing configuration and airspeed, and adjust
pitch attitude and power as required to maintain a stabilized approach.
PA.IV.J.S6 Maintain manufacturer’s published approach airspeed or in its absence not more than 1.3
VSO, +10/-5 knots.
PA.IV.J.S7 Make smooth, timely, and correct power and control adjustments to maintain proper pitch
attitude and rate of descent to touchdown.
PA.IV.J.S8 Contact the water in a proper pitch attitude, and slow to idle taxi speed.
PA.IV.J.S9 Maintain directional control throughout the approach and landing.IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
31
Task K. Rough Water Takeoff and Climb (ASES, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-23; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a rough water takeoff and climb.
Note: If a rough water condition does not exist, the applicant must be evaluated by
simulating the Task.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.K.K1 Effects of atmospheric conditions, including wind, on takeoff and climb performance.
PA.IV.K.K2 VX and VY.
PA.IV.K.K3 Appropriate airplane configuration.
PA.IV.K.K4 Appropriate use of rough water takeoff and climb technique.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.K.R1 Selection of takeoff path based on pilot capability, airplane performance and limitations,
available distance, and wind.
PA.IV.K.R2 Effects of:
PA.IV.K.R2a a. Crosswind
PA.IV.K.R2b b. Windshear
PA.IV.K.R2c c. Tailwind
PA.IV.K.R2d d. Wake turbulence
PA.IV.K.R2e e. Water surface/condition
PA.IV.K.R3 Abnormal operations, to include planning for:
PA.IV.K.R3a a. Rejected takeoff
PA.IV.K.R3b b. Engine failure in takeoff/climb phase of flight
PA.IV.K.R4 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vessels, persons, and
wildlife.
PA.IV.K.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.K.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.IV.K.R7 Failure to confirm gear position in an amphibious airplane.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.K.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.K.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.K.S3 Verify assigned/correct takeoff path.
PA.IV.K.S4 Ascertain wind direction with or without visible wind direction indicators.
PA.IV.K.S5 Position flight controls and configure the airplane for the existing conditions.
PA.IV.K.S6 Clear the area, select an appropriate takeoff path considering wind, swells, surface
hazards, or vessels.
PA.IV.K.S7 Retract the water rudders as appropriate; advance the throttle smoothly to takeoff power.
PA.IV.K.S8 Establish and maintain an appropriate planing attitude, directional control, and correct for
porpoising, skipping, and increase in water drag.
PA.IV.K.S9 Avoid excessive water spray on the propeller(s).
PA.IV.K.S10 Lift off at minimum airspeed and accelerate to VY +10/- 5 knots before leaving ground
effect.
PA.IV.K.S11 Configure the airplane after a positive rate of climb has been verified or in accordance
with airplane manufacturer’s instructions.
PA.IV.K.S12 Maintain VY +10/-5 knots to a safe maneuvering altitude.
PA.IV.K.S13 Maintain directional control and proper wind-drift correction throughout takeoff and climb.IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
32
Task L. Rough Water Approach and Landing (ASES, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-23; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a rough water approach and landing.
Note: If a rough water condition does not exist, the applicant must be evaluated by
simulating the Task.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.L.K1 A stabilized approach, to include energy management concepts.
PA.IV.L.K2 Effects of atmospheric conditions, including wind, on approach and landing performance.
PA.IV.L.K3 Wind correction techniques on approach and landing.
PA.IV.L.K4 When and why rough water techniques are used.
PA.IV.L.K5 How a rough water approach and landing is executed.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.L.R1 Selection of approach path and touchdown area based on pilot capability, airplane
performance and limitations, available distance, and wind.
PA.IV.L.R2 Effects of:
PA.IV.L.R2a a. Crosswind
PA.IV.L.R2b b. Windshear
PA.IV.L.R2c c. Tailwind
PA.IV.L.R2d d. Wake turbulence
PA.IV.L.R2e e. Water surface/condition
PA.IV.L.R3 Planning for go-around and rejected landing.
PA.IV.L.R4 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vessels, persons, and
wildlife.
PA.IV.L.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.L.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.IV.L.R7 Failure to confirm gear position in an amphibious airplane.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.L.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.L.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.L.S3 Ensure the airplane is aligned with the correct/assigned waterway.
PA.IV.L.S4 Scan the landing area for traffic and obstructions.
PA.IV.L.S5 Select and aim for a suitable touchdown point considering the wind, landing surface, and
obstructions.
PA.IV.L.S6 Establish the recommended approach and landing configuration and airspeed, and adjust
pitch attitude and power as required to maintain a stabilized approach.
PA.IV.L.S7 Maintain manufacturer’s published approach airspeed or in its absence not more than 1.3
VSO, +10/-5 knots with gust factor applied.
PA.IV.L.S8 Maintain directional control and appropriate crosswind correction throughout the approach
and landing.
PA.IV.L.S9 Make smooth, timely, and correct power and control adjustments to maintain proper pitch
attitude and rate of descent to touchdown.
PA.IV.L.S10 Contact the water in a proper pitch attitude, considering the type of rough water.IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
33
Task M. Forward Slip to a Landing (ASEL, ASES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a forward slip to a landing.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.M.K1 Concepts of energy management during a forward slip approach.
PA.IV.M.K2 Effects of atmospheric conditions, including wind, on approach and landing performance.
PA.IV.M.K3 Wind correction techniques during forward slip.
PA.IV.M.K4 When and why a forward slip approach is used during an approach.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.M.R1 Selection of runway or approach path and touchdown area based on pilot capability,
airplane performance and limitations, available distance, and wind.
PA.IV.M.R2 Effects of:
PA.IV.M.R2a a. Crosswind
PA.IV.M.R2b b. Windshear
PA.IV.M.R2c c. Tailwind
PA.IV.M.R2d d. Wake turbulence
PA.IV.M.R2e e. Landing surface/condition
PA.IV.M.R3 Planning for:
PA.IV.M.R3a a. Go-around and rejected landing
PA.IV.M.R3b b. Land and hold short operations (LAHSO)
PA.IV.M.R4 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vehicles, vessels, persons,
and wildlife.
PA.IV.M.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.M.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.IV.M.R7 Forward slip operations, including fuel flowage, tail stalls with flaps, and lack of airspeed
control.
PA.IV.M.R8 Surface contact with the airplane’s longitudinal axis misaligned.
PA.IV.M.R9 Unstable approach.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.M.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.M.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.M.S3 Plan and follow a flightpath to the selected landing area considering altitude, wind, terrain,
and obstructions.
PA.IV.M.S4 Select the most suitable touchdown point based on wind, landing surface, obstructions,
and airplane limitations.
PA.IV.M.S5 Position airplane on downwind leg, parallel to landing runway.
PA.IV.M.S6 Configure the airplane correctly.
PA.IV.M.S7 As necessary, correlate crosswind with direction of forward slip and transition to sideslip
before touchdown.
PA.IV.M.S8
Touch down at a proper pitch attitude, within 400 feet beyond or on the specified point,
with no side drift, and with the airplane’s longitudinal axis aligned with and over the
runway center/landing path.
PA.IV.M.S9 Maintain a ground track aligned with the runway center/landing path.IV. Takeoffs, Landings, and Go-Arounds
34
Task N. Go-Around/Rejected Landing
References FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-23; POH/AFM; AIM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a go-around/rejected landing with emphasis on factors that contribute to
landing conditions that may require a go-around.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IV.N.K1 A stabilized approach, to include energy management concepts.
PA.IV.N.K2 Effects of atmospheric conditions, including wind and density altitude on a go-around or
rejected landing.
PA.IV.N.K3 Wind correction techniques on takeoff/departure and approach/landing.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IV.N.R1 Delayed recognition of the need for a go-around/rejected landing.
PA.IV.N.R2 Delayed performance of a go-around at low altitude.
PA.IV.N.R3 Improper application of power.
PA.IV.N.R4 Improper airplane configuration.
PA.IV.N.R5 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vehicles, vessels, persons,
and wildlife.
PA.IV.N.R6 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IV.N.R7 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IV.N.S1 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.IV.N.S2 Make radio calls as appropriate.
PA.IV.N.S3 Make a timely decision to discontinue the approach to landing.
PA.IV.N.S4 Apply takeoff power immediately and transition to climb pitch attitude for VX or VY as
appropriate +10/-5 knots.
PA.IV.N.S5 Configure the airplane after a positive rate of climb has been verified or in accordance
with airplane manufacturer’s instructions.
PA.IV.N.S6 Maneuver to the side of the runway/landing area when necessary to clear and avoid
conflicting traffic.
PA.IV.N.S7 Maintain VY +10/-5 knots to a safe maneuvering altitude.
PA.IV.N.S8 Maintain directional control and proper wind-drift correction throughout the climb.35
V. Performance and Ground Reference Maneuvers
Task A. Steep Turns
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with steep turns.
Note: See Appendix 7: Aircraft, Equipment, and Operational Requirements & Limitations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.V.A.K1 Purpose of steep turns.
PA.V.A.K2 Aerodynamics associated with steep turns, to include:
PA.V.A.K2a a. Coordinated and uncoordinated flight
PA.V.A.K2b b. Overbanking tendencies
PA.V.A.K2c c. Maneuvering speed, including the impact of weight changes
PA.V.A.K2d d. Load factor and accelerated stalls
PA.V.A.K2e e. Rate and radius of turn
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.V.A.R1 Failure to divide attention between airplane control and orientation.
PA.V.A.R2 Collision hazards, to include aircraft and terrain.
PA.V.A.R3 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.V.A.R4 Distractions, improper task management, loss of situational awareness, or disorientation.
PA.V.A.R5 Failure to maintain coordinated flight.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.V.A.S1 Clear the area.
PA.V.A.S2 Establish the manufacturer’s recommended airspeed; or if one is not available, an
airspeed not to exceed VA.
PA.V.A.S3 Roll into a coordinated 360° steep turn with approximately a 45° bank.
PA.V.A.S4 Perform the Task in the opposite direction, as specified by evaluator.
PA.V.A.S5 Maintain the entry altitude ±100 feet, airspeed ±10 knots, bank ±5°, and roll out on the
entry heading ±10°.V. Performance and Ground Reference Maneuvers
36
Task B. Ground Reference Maneuvers
References 14 CFR part 61; FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with ground reference maneuvering which may include a rectangular course, S-
turns, and turns around a point.
Note: See Appendix 7: Aircraft, Equipment, and Operational Requirements & Limitations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.V.B.K1 Purpose of ground reference maneuvers.
PA.V.B.K2 Effects of wind on ground track and relation to a ground reference point.
PA.V.B.K3 Effects of bank angle and groundspeed on rate and radius of turn.
PA.V.B.K4 Relationship of rectangular course to airport traffic pattern.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.V.B.R1 Failure to divide attention between airplane control and orientation.
PA.V.B.R2 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.V.B.R3 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.V.B.R4 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.V.B.R5 Failure to maintain coordinated flight.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.V.B.S1 Clear the area.
PA.V.B.S2 Select a suitable ground reference area, line, or point as appropriate.
PA.V.B.S3 Plan the maneuver:
Note: The evaluator must select at least one maneuver for the applicant to demonstrate.
PA.V.B.S3a
a. Rectangular course: enter a left or right pattern, 600 to 1,000 feet above ground level
(AGL) at an appropriate distance from the selected reference area, 45° to the
downwind leg
PA.V.B.S3b b. S-turns: enter perpendicular to the selected reference line, 600 to 1,000 feet AGL at
an appropriate distance from the selected reference area
PA.V.B.S3c c. Turns around a point: enter at an appropriate distance from the reference point, 600
to 1,000 feet AGL at an appropriate distance from the selected reference area
PA.V.B.S4
Apply adequate wind-drift correction during straight and turning flight to maintain a
constant ground track around a rectangular reference area, or to maintain a constant
radius turn on each side of a selected reference line or point.
PA.V.B.S5
If performing S-Turns, reverse the turn directly over the selected reference line; if
performing turns around a point, complete turns in either direction, as specified by the
evaluator.
PA.V.B.S6 Divide attention between airplane control, traffic avoidance and the ground track while
maintaining coordinated flight.
PA.V.B.S7 Maintain altitude ±100 feet; maintain airspeed ±10 knots.37
VI. Navigation
Task A. Pilotage and Dead Reckoning
References 14 CFR part 61; FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-25; Navigation Charts
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with pilotage and dead reckoning.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VI.A.K1 Pilotage and dead reckoning.
PA.VI.A.K2 Magnetic compass errors.
PA.VI.A.K3 Topography.
PA.VI.A.K4 Selection of appropriate:
PA.VI.A.K4a a. Route
PA.VI.A.K4b b. Altitude(s)
PA.VI.A.K4c c. Checkpoints
PA.VI.A.K5 Plotting a course, to include:
PA.VI.A.K5a a. Determining heading, speed, and course
PA.VI.A.K5b b. Wind correction angle
PA.VI.A.K5c c. Estimating time, speed, and distance
PA.VI.A.K5d d. True airspeed and density altitude
PA.VI.A.K6 Power setting selection.
PA.VI.A.K7 Planned versus actual flight plan calculations and required corrections.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VI.A.R1 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.VI.A.R2 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.VI.A.S1 Prepare and use a flight log.
PA.VI.A.S2 Navigate by pilotage.
PA.VI.A.S3 Navigate by means of pre-computed headings, groundspeeds, and elapsed time.
PA.VI.A.S4 Use the magnetic direction indicator in navigation, to include turns to headings.
PA.VI.A.S5 Verify position within three nautical miles of the flight-planned route.
PA.VI.A.S6 Arrive at the en route checkpoints within five minutes of the initial or revised estimated
time of arrival (ETA) and provide a destination estimate.
PA.VI.A.S7 Maintain the appropriate altitude ±200 feet and heading ±15°.VI. Navigation
38
Task B. Navigation Systems and Radar Services
References
FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-6, FAA-H-8083-25; AIM
Note: The evaluator should reference the manufacturer’s equipment supplement(s) as
necessary.
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with navigation systems and radar services.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VI.B.K1 Ground-based navigation (orientation, course determination, equipment, tests, and
regulations).
PA.VI.B.K2 Satellite-based navigation (e.g., equipment, regulations, database considerations, and
limitations of satellite navigation).
PA.VI.B.K3 Radar assistance to VFR aircraft (e.g., operations, equipment, available services, traffic
advisories).
PA.VI.B.K4 Transponder (Mode(s) A, C, and S).
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VI.B.R1 Failure to manage automated navigation and autoflight systems.
PA.VI.B.R2 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.VI.B.R3 Limitations of the navigation system in use.
PA.VI.B.R4 Loss of a navigation signal.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.VI.B.S1 Use an airborne electronic navigation system.
PA.VI.B.S2 Determine the airplane’s position using the navigation system.
PA.VI.B.S3 Intercept and track a given course, radial, or bearing, as appropriate.
PA.VI.B.S4 Recognize and describe the indication of station or waypoint passage, if appropriate.
PA.VI.B.S5 Recognize signal loss or interference and take appropriate action, if applicable.
PA.VI.B.S6 Use proper communication procedures when utilizing radar services.
PA.VI.B.S7 Maintain the appropriate altitude ±200 feet and heading ±15°.VI. Navigation
39
Task C. Diversion
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-25; AIM; Navigation Charts
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with diversion.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VI.C.K1 Selecting an alternate destination.
PA.VI.C.K2 Situations that require deviations from flight plan or ATC instructions.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VI.C.R1 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.VI.C.R2 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.VI.C.R3 Failure to make a timely decision to divert.
PA.VI.C.R4 Failure to select an appropriate airport or seaplane base.
PA.VI.C.R5 Failure to utilize all available resources (e.g., automation, ATC, and flight deck planning
aids).
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.VI.C.S1 Select a suitable destination and route for diversion.
PA.VI.C.S2 Make a reasonable estimate of heading, groundspeed, arrival time, and fuel consumption
to the divert airport.
PA.VI.C.S3 Maintain the appropriate altitude ±200 feet and heading ±15°.
PA.VI.C.S4 Update/interpret weather in flight.
PA.VI.C.S5 Utilize flight deck displays of digital weather and aeronautical information, as applicable.VI. Navigation
40
Task D. Lost Procedures
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-25; AIM; Navigation Charts
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with lost procedures and taking appropriate steps to achieve a satisfactory
outcome if lost.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VI.D.K1 Methods to determine position.
PA.VI.D.K2 Assistance available if lost (e.g., radar services, communication procedures).
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VI.D.R1 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.VI.D.R2 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.VI.D.R3 Failure to record times over waypoints.
PA.VI.D.R4 Failure to seek assistance or declare an emergency in a deteriorating situation.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.VI.D.S1 Use an appropriate method to determine position.
PA.VI.D.S2 Maintain an appropriate heading and climb as necessary.
PA.VI.D.S3 Identify prominent landmarks.
PA.VI.D.S4 Use navigation systems/facilities or contact an ATC facility for assistance.41
VII. Slow Flight and Stalls
Task A. Maneuvering During Slow Flight
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-25; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with maneuvering during slow flight.
Note: See Appendix 6: Safety of Flight and Appendix 7: Aircraft, Equipment, and
Operational Requirements & Limitations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VII.A.K1
Aerodynamics associated with slow flight in various airplane configurations, to include the
relationship between angle of attack, airspeed, load factor, power setting, airplane weight
and center of gravity, airplane attitude, and yaw effects.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VII.A.R1 Inadvertent slow flight and flight with a stall warning, which could lead to loss of control.
PA.VII.A.R2 Range and limitations of stall warning indicators (e.g., airplane buffet, stall horn, etc.).
PA.VII.A.R3 Failure to maintain coordinated flight.
PA.VII.A.R4 Effect of environmental elements on airplane performance (e.g., turbulence, microbursts,
and high-density altitude).
PA.VII.A.R5 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.VII.A.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.VII.A.S1 Clear the area.
PA.VII.A.S2 Select an entry altitude that will allow the Task to be completed no lower than 1,500 feet
AGL (ASEL, ASES) or 3,000 feet AGL (AMEL, AMES).
PA.VII.A.S3
Establish and maintain an airspeed at which any further increase in angle of attack,
increase in load factor, or reduction in power, would result in a stall warning (e.g., airplane
buffet, stall horn, etc.).
PA.VII.A.S4
Accomplish coordinated straight-and-level flight, turns, climbs, and descents with the
airplane configured as specified by the evaluator without a stall warning (e.g., airplane
buffet, stall horn, etc.).
PA.VII.A.S5 Maintain the specified altitude, ±100 feet; specified heading, ±10°; airspeed, +10/-0 knots;
and specified angle of bank, ±10°.VII. Slow Flight and Stalls
42
Task B. Power-Off Stalls
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; AC 61-67; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with power-off stalls.
Note: See Appendix 7: Aircraft, Equipment, and Operational Requirements & Limitations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VII.B.K1
Aerodynamics associated with stalls in various airplane configurations, to include the
relationship between angle of attack, airspeed, load factor, power setting, airplane weight
and center of gravity, airplane attitude, and yaw effects.
PA.VII.B.K2 Stall characteristics (i.e., airplane design) and impending stall and full stall indications
(i.e., how to recognize by sight, sound, or feel).
PA.VII.B.K3 Factors and situations that can lead to a power-off stall and actions that can be taken to
prevent it.
PA.VII.B.K4 Fundamentals of stall recovery.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VII.B.R1 Factors and situations that could lead to an inadvertent power-off stall, spin, and loss of
control.
PA.VII.B.R2 Range and limitations of stall warning indicators (e.g., airplane buffet, stall horn, etc.).
PA.VII.B.R3 Failure to recognize and recover at the stall warning during normal operations.
PA.VII.B.R4 Improper stall recovery procedure.
PA.VII.B.R5 Secondary stalls, accelerated stalls, and cross-control stalls.
PA.VII.B.R6 Effect of environmental elements on airplane performance related to power-off stalls (e.g.,
turbulence, microbursts, and high-density altitude).
PA.VII.B.R7 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.VII.B.R8 Distractions, improper task management, loss of situational awareness, or disorientation.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.VII.B.S1 Clear the area.
PA.VII.B.S2 Select an entry altitude that will allow the Task to be completed no lower than 1,500 feet
AGL (ASEL, ASES) or 3,000 feet AGL (AMEL, AMES).
PA.VII.B.S3 Configure the airplane in the approach or landing configuration, as specified by the
evaluator, and maintain coordinated flight throughout the maneuver.
PA.VII.B.S4 Establish a stabilized descent.
PA.VII.B.S5 Transition smoothly from the approach or landing attitude to a pitch attitude that will induce a
stall.
PA.VII.B.S6 Maintain a specified heading ±10° if in straight flight; maintain a specified angle of bank not
to exceed 20°, ±10° if in turning flight, while inducing the stall.
PA.VII.B.S7 Acknowledge cues of the impending stall and then recover promptly after a full stall occurs.
PA.VII.B.S8 Execute a stall recovery in accordance with procedures set forth in the POH/AFM.
PA.VII.B.S9 Configure the airplane as recommended by the manufacturer, and accelerate to VX or VY.
PA.VII.B.S10 Return to the altitude, heading, and airspeed specified by the evaluator.VII. Slow Flight and Stalls
43
Task C. Power-On Stalls
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; AC 61-67; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with power-on stalls.
Note: See Appendix 6: Safety of Flight and Appendix 7: Aircraft, Equipment, and
Operational Requirements & Limitations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VII.C.K1
Aerodynamics associated with stalls in various airplane configurations, to include the
relationship between angle of attack, airspeed, load factor, power setting, airplane weight
and center of gravity, airplane attitude, and yaw effects.
PA.VII.C.K2 Stall characteristics (i.e., airplane design) and impending stall and full stall indications
(i.e., how to recognize by sight, sound, or feel).
PA.VII.C.K3 Factors and situations that can lead to a power-on stall and actions that can be taken to
prevent it.
PA.VII.C.K4 Fundamentals of stall recovery.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VII.C.R1 Factors and situations that could lead to an inadvertent power-on stall, spin, and loss of
control.
PA.VII.C.R2 Range and limitations of stall warning indicators (e.g., airplane buffet, stall horn, etc.).
PA.VII.C.R3 Failure to recognize and recover at the stall warning during normal operations.
PA.VII.C.R4 Improper stall recovery procedure.
PA.VII.C.R5 Secondary stalls, accelerated stalls, elevator trim stalls, and cross-control stalls.
PA.VII.C.R6 Effect of environmental elements on airplane performance related to power-on stalls (e.g.,
turbulence, microbursts, and high-density altitude).
PA.VII.C.R7 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.VII.C.R8 Distractions, improper task management, loss of situational awareness, or disorientation.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.VII.C.S1 Clear the area.
PA.VII.C.S2 Select an entry altitude that will allow the Task to be completed no lower than 1,500 feet
AGL (ASEL, ASES) or 3,000 feet AGL (AMEL, AMES).
PA.VII.C.S3 Establish the takeoff, departure, or cruise configuration, as specified by the evaluator, and
maintain coordinated flight throughout the maneuver.
PA.VII.C.S4 Set power (as assigned by the evaluator) to no less than 65 percent power.
PA.VII.C.S5 Transition smoothly from the takeoff or departure attitude to the pitch attitude that will
induce a stall.
PA.VII.C.S6 Maintain a specified heading ±10° if in straight flight; maintain a specified angle of bank
not to exceed 20°, ±10° if in turning flight, while inducing the stall.
PA.VII.C.S7 Acknowledge cues of the impending stall and then recover promptly after a full stall
occurs.
PA.VII.C.S8 Execute a stall recovery in accordance with procedures set forth in the POH/AFM.
PA.VII.C.S9 Configure the airplane as recommended by the manufacturer, and accelerate to VX or VY.
PA.VII.C.S10 Return to the altitude, heading, and airspeed specified by the evaluator.VII. Slow Flight and Stalls
44
Task D. Spin Awareness
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; AC 61-67; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with spins, flight situations where unintentional spins may occur and procedures
for recovery from unintentional spins.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VII.D.K1
Aerodynamics associated with spins in various airplane configurations, to include the
relationship between angle of attack, airspeed, load factor, power setting, airplane weight
and center of gravity, airplane attitude, and yaw effects.
PA.VII.D.K2 What causes a spin and how to identify the entry, incipient, and developed phases of a
spin.
PA.VII.D.K3 Spin recovery procedure.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VII.D.R1 Factors and situations that could lead to inadvertent spin and loss of control.
PA.VII.D.R2 Range and limitations of stall warning indicators (e.g., airplane buffet, stall horn, etc.).
PA.VII.D.R3 Improper spin recovery procedure.
PA.VII.D.R4 Effect of environmental elements on airplane performance related to spins (e.g.,
turbulence, microbursts, and high-density altitude).
PA.VII.D.R5 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.VII.D.R6 Distractions, improper task management, loss of situational awareness, or disorientation.
Skills [Intentionally left blank]45
VIII. Basic Instrument Maneuvers
Task A. Straight-and-Level Flight
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-15
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with flying during straight-and-level flight solely by reference to instruments.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VIII.A.K1 Flight instruments as related to:
PA.VIII.A.K1a a. Sensitivity, limitations, and potential errors in unusual attitudes
PA.VIII.A.K1b b. Correlation (pitch instruments/bank instruments)
PA.VIII.A.K1c c. Function and operation
PA.VIII.A.K1d d. Proper instrument cross-check techniques
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VIII.A.R1 Instrument flying hazards to include failure to maintain VFR, spatial disorientation, loss of
control, fatigue, stress, and emergency off airport landings.
PA.VIII.A.R2 Failure to seek assistance or declare an emergency in a deteriorating situation.
PA.VIII.A.R3 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.VIII.A.R4 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.VIII.A.S1 Maintain straight-and-level flight using proper instrument cross-check and interpretation,
and coordinated control application.
PA.VIII.A.S2 Maintain altitude ±200 feet, heading ±20°, and airspeed ±10 knots.VIII. Basic Instrument Maneuvers
46
Task B. Constant Airspeed Climbs
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-15
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with attitude instrument flying during constant airspeed climbs solely by reference
to instruments.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VIII.B.K1 Flight instruments as related to:
PA.VIII.B.K1a a. Sensitivity, limitations, and potential errors in unusual attitudes
PA.VIII.B.K1b b. Correlation (pitch instruments/bank instruments)
PA.VIII.B.K1c c. Function and operation
PA.VIII.B.K1d d. Proper instrument cross-check techniques
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VIII.B.R1 Instrument flying hazards to include failure to maintain VFR, spatial disorientation, loss of
control, fatigue, stress, and emergency off airport landings.
PA.VIII.B.R2 Failure to seek assistance or declare an emergency in a deteriorating situation.
PA.VIII.B.R3 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.VIII.B.R4 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.VIII.B.S1
Transition to the climb pitch attitude and power setting on an assigned heading using
proper instrument cross-check and interpretation, and coordinated flight control
application.
PA.VIII.B.S2 Climb at a constant airspeed to specific altitudes in straight flight and turns.
PA.VIII.B.S3 Level off at the assigned altitude and maintain altitude ±200 feet, heading ±20°, and
airspeed ±10 knots.VIII. Basic Instrument Maneuvers
47
Task C. Constant Airspeed Descents
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-15
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with attitude instrument flying during constant airspeed descents solely by
reference to instruments.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VIII.C.K1 Flight instruments as related to:
PA.VIII.C.K1a a. Sensitivity, limitations, and potential errors in unusual attitudes
PA.VIII.C.K1b b. Correlation (pitch instruments/bank instruments)
PA.VIII.C.K1c c. Function and operation
PA.VIII.C.K1d d. Proper instrument cross-check techniques
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VIII.C.R1 Instrument flying hazards to include failure to maintain VFR, spatial disorientation, loss of
control, fatigue, stress, and emergency off airport landings.
PA.VIII.C.R2 Failure to seek assistance or declare an emergency in a deteriorating situation.
PA.VIII.C.R3 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.VIII.C.R4 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.VIII.C.S1
Transition to the descent pitch attitude and power setting on an assigned heading using
proper instrument cross-check and interpretation, and coordinated flight control
application.
PA.VIII.C.S2 Descend at a constant airspeed to specific altitudes in straight flight and turns.
PA.VIII.C.S3 Level off at the assigned altitude and maintain altitude ±200 feet, heading ±20°, and
airspeed ±10 knots.VIII. Basic Instrument Maneuvers
48
Task D. Turns to Headings
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-15
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with attitude instrument flying during turns to headings solely by reference to
instruments.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VIII.D.K1 Flight instruments as related to:
PA.VIII.D.K1a a. Sensitivity, limitations, and potential errors in unusual attitudes
PA.VIII.D.K1b b. Correlation (pitch instruments/bank instruments)
PA.VIII.D.K1c c. Function and operation
PA.VIII.D.K1d d. Proper instrument cross-check techniques
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VIII.D.R1 Instrument flying hazards to include failure to maintain VFR, spatial disorientation, loss of
control, fatigue, stress, and emergency off airport landings.
PA.VIII.D.R2 Failure to seek assistance or declare an emergency in a deteriorating situation.
PA.VIII.D.R3 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.VIII.D.R4 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.VIII.D.S1 Turn to headings, maintain altitude ±200 feet, maintain a standard rate turn, roll out on the
assigned heading ±10°, and maintain airspeed ±10 knots.VIII. Basic Instrument Maneuvers
49
Task E. Recovery from Unusual Flight Attitudes
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-15
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with attitude instrument flying while recovering from unusual attitudes solely by
reference to instruments.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VIII.E.K1 Flight instruments as related to:
PA.VIII.E.K1a a. Sensitivity, limitations, and potential errors in unusual attitudes
PA.VIII.E.K1b b. Correlation (pitch instruments/bank instruments)
PA.VIII.E.K1c c. Function and operation
PA.VIII.E.K1d d. Proper instrument cross-check techniques
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VIII.E.R1 Instrument flying hazards to include failure to maintain VFR, spatial disorientation, loss of
control, fatigue, stress, and emergency off airport landings.
PA.VIII.E.R2 Failure to seek assistance or declare an emergency in a deteriorating situation.
PA.VIII.E.R3 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.VIII.E.R4 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.VIII.E.R5 Failure to interpret flight instruments.
PA.VIII.E.R6 Failure to unload the wings in recovering from high G situations.
PA.VII.E.R7 Exceeding the operating envelope during the recovery.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.VIII.E.S1
Recognize unusual flight attitudes; perform the correct, coordinated, and smooth flight
control application to resolve unusual pitch and bank attitudes while staying within the
airplane’s limitations and flight parameters.VIII. Basic Instrument Maneuvers
50
Task F. Radio Communications, Navigation Systems/Facilities, and Radar Services
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-15, FAA-H-8083-25
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with radio communications, navigation systems/facilities, and radar services
available for use during flight solely by reference to instruments.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.VIII.F.K1 Operating communications equipment to include identifying and selecting radio
frequencies, requesting and following ATC instructions.
PA.VIII.F.K2 Operating navigation equipment to include functions and displays, and following bearings,
radials, or courses.
PA.VIII.F.K3 Air traffic control facilities and services.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.VIII.F.R1 Failure to seek assistance or declare an emergency in a deteriorating situation.
PA.VIII.F.R2 Failure to utilize all available resources (e.g., automation, ATC, and flight deck planning
aids).
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.VIII.F.S1 Maintain airplane control while selecting proper communications frequencies, identifying
the appropriate facility, and managing navigation equipment.
PA.VIII.F.S2 Comply with ATC instructions.
PA.VIII.F.S3 Maintain altitude ±200 feet, heading ±20°, and airspeed ±10 knots.51
IX. Emergency Operations
Task A. Emergency Descent
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with an emergency descent.
Note: See Appendix 6: Safety of Flight.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IX.A.K1 Situations that would require an emergency descent (e.g., depressurization, smoke, or
engine fire).
PA.IX.A.K2 Immediate action items and emergency procedures.
PA.IX.A.K3 Airspeed, to include airspeed limitations.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IX.A.R1 Failure to consider altitude, wind, terrain, obstructions, and available glide distance.
PA.IX.A.R2 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.IX.A.R3 Improper airplane configuration.
PA.IX.A.R4 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IX.A.S1 Clear the area.
PA.IX.A.S2
Establish and maintain the appropriate airspeed and configuration appropriate to the
scenario specified by the evaluator and as covered in POH/AFM for the emergency
descent.
PA.IX.A.S3 Maintain orientation, divide attention appropriately, and plan and execute a smooth
recovery.
PA.IX.A.S4 Use bank angle between 30° and 45° to maintain positive load factors during the descent.
PA.IX.A.S5 Maintain appropriate airspeed +0/-10 knots, and level off at a specified altitude ±100 feet.
PA.IX.A.S6 Complete the appropriate checklist.IX. Emergency Operations
52
Task B. Emergency Approach and Landing (Simulated) (ASEL, ASES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with emergency approach and landing procedures.
Note: See Appendix 6: Safety of Flight.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IX.B.K1 Immediate action items and emergency procedures.
PA.IX.B.K2 Airspeed, to include:
PA.IX.B.K2a a. Importance of best glide speed and its relationship to distance
PA.IX.B.K2b b. Difference between best glide speed and minimum sink speed
PA.IX.B.K2c c. Effects of wind on glide distance
PA.IX.B.K3 Effects of atmospheric conditions on emergency approach and landing.
PA.IX.B.K4 A stabilized approach, to include energy management concepts.
PA.IX.B.K5 ELTs and other emergency locating devices.
PA.IX.B.K6 ATC services to aircraft in distress.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess, and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IX.B.R1 Failure to consider altitude, wind, terrain, obstructions, gliding distance, and available
landing distance.
PA.IX.B.R2 Failure to plan and follow a flightpath to the selected landing area.
PA.IX.B.R3 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.IX.B.R4 Improper airplane configuration.
PA.IX.B.R5 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IX.B.R6 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IX.B.S1 Establish and maintain the recommended best glide airspeed, ±10 knots.
PA.IX.B.S2 Configure the airplane in accordance with the POH/AFM and existing conditions.
PA.IX.B.S3 Select a suitable landing area considering altitude, wind, terrain, obstructions, and
available glide distance.
PA.IX.B.S4 Plan and follow a flightpath to the selected landing area considering altitude, wind, terrain,
and obstructions.
PA.IX.B.S5 Prepare for landing as specified by the evaluator.
PA.IX.B.S6 Complete the appropriate checklist.IX. Emergency Operations
53
Task C. Systems and Equipment Malfunctions
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with system and equipment malfunctions appropriate to the airplane provided for
the practical test and analyzing the situation and take appropriate action for simulated
emergencies.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IX.C.K1 Partial or complete power loss related to the specific powerplant, including:
PA.IX.C.K1a a. Engine roughness or overheat
PA.IX.C.K1b b. Carburetor or induction icing
PA.IX.C.K1c c. Loss of oil pressure
PA.IX.C.K1d d. Fuel starvation
PA.IX.C.K2 System and equipment malfunctions specific to the airplane, including:
PA.IX.C.K2a a. Electrical malfunction
PA.IX.C.K2b b. Vacuum/pressure and associated flight instrument malfunctions
PA.IX.C.K2c c. Pitot/static system malfunction
PA.IX.C.K2d d. Electronic flight deck display malfunction
PA.IX.C.K2e e. Landing gear or flap malfunction
PA.IX.C.K2f f. Inoperative trim
PA.IX.C.K3 Smoke/fire/engine compartment fire.
PA.IX.C.K4 Any other system specific to the airplane (e.g., supplemental oxygen, deicing).
PA.IX.C.K5 Inadvertent door or window opening.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IX.C.R1 Failure to use the proper checklist for a system or equipment malfunction.
PA.IX.C.R2 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IX.C.S1 Describe appropriate action for simulated emergencies specified by the evaluator, from at
least three of the elements or sub-elements listed in K1 through K5 above.
PA.IX.C.S2 Complete the appropriate checklist.IX. Emergency Operations
54
Task D. Emergency Equipment and Survival Gear
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with emergency equipment, and survival gear appropriate to the airplane and
environment encountered during flight and identifying appropriate equipment that should be
onboard the airplane.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IX.D.K1 Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT) operations, limitations, and testing requirements.
PA.IX.D.K2 Fire extinguisher operations and limitations.
PA.IX.D.K3 Emergency equipment and survival gear needed for:
PA.IX.D.K3a a. Climate extremes (hot/cold)
PA.IX.D.K3b b. Mountainous terrain
PA.IX.D.K3c c. Overwater operations
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IX.D.R1 Failure to plan for basic needs (water, clothing, shelter) for 48 to 72 hours.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IX.D.S1 Identify appropriate equipment and personal gear.
PA.IX.D.S2 Brief passengers on proper use of on-board emergency equipment and survival gear.IX. Emergency Operations
55
Task E. Engine Failure During Takeoff Before VMC (Simulated) (AMEL, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; FAA-P-8740-66; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with an engine failure during takeoff before VMC.
Note: See Appendix 6: Safety of Flight and Appendix 7: Aircraft, Equipment, and
Operational Requirements & Limitations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IX.E.K1 Factors affecting VMC.
PA.IX.E.K2 VMC (red line) and VYSE (blue line).
PA.IX.E.K3 Accelerate/stop distance.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IX.E.R1 Failure to plan for engine failure during takeoff.
PA.IX.E.R2 Improper airplane configuration.
PA.IX.E.R3 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IX.E.S1 Close the throttles smoothly and promptly when a simulated engine failure occurs.
PA.IX.E.S2 Maintain directional control and apply brakes (AMEL), or flight controls (AMES), as
necessary.IX. Emergency Operations
56
Task F. Engine Failure After Liftoff (Simulated) (AMEL, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; FAA-P-8740-66; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with an engine failure after liftoff.
Note: See Appendix 6: Safety of Flight and Appendix 7: Aircraft, Equipment, and
Operational Requirements & Limitations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IX.F.K1 Factors affecting VMC.
PA.IX.F.K2 VMC (red line), VYSE (blue line), and VSSE (safe single-engine speed).
PA.IX.F.K3 Accelerate/stop and accelerate/go distances.
PA.IX.F.K4 How to identify, verify, feather, and secure an inoperative engine.
PA.IX.F.K5 Importance of drag reduction, to include propeller feathering, gear and flap retraction, the
manufacturer’s recommended control input and its relation to zero sideslip.
PA.IX.F.K6 Simulated propeller feathering and the evaluator’s zero-thrust procedures and
responsibilities.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IX.F.R1 Failure to plan for engine failure after liftoff.
PA.IX.F.R2 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.IX.F.R3 Improper airplane configuration.
PA.IX.F.R4 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IX.F.R5 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IX.F.S1 Promptly recognize an engine failure, maintain control, and utilize appropriate emergency
procedures.
PA.IX.F.S2 Establish VYSE; if obstructions are present, establish VXSE or VMC +5 knots, whichever is
greater, until obstructions are cleared. Then transition to VYSE.
PA.IX.F.S3 Reduce drag by retracting landing gear and flaps in accordance with the manufacturer’s
guidance.
PA.IX.F.S4 Simulate feathering the propeller on the inoperative engine (evaluator should then
establish zero thrust on the inoperative engine).
PA.IX.F.S5 Use flight controls in the proper combination as recommended by the manufacturer, or as
required to maintain best performance, and trim as required.
PA.IX.F.S6 Monitor the operating engine and make adjustments as necessary.
PA.IX.F.S7
Recognize the airplane’s performance capabilities. If a climb is not possible at VYSE,
maintain VYSE and return to the departure airport for landing, or initiate an approach to the
most suitable landing area available.
PA.IX.F.S8 Simulate securing the inoperative engine.
PA.IX.F.S9 Maintain heading ±10° and airspeed ±5 knots.
PA.IX.F.S10 Complete the appropriate checklist.IX. Emergency Operations
57
Task G. Approach and Landing with an Inoperative Engine (Simulated) (AMEL, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; FAA-P-8740-66; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with an approach and landing with an engine inoperative, including engine failure
on final approach.
Note: See Appendix 6: Safety of Flight and Appendix 7: Aircraft, Equipment, and
Operational Requirements & Limitations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.IX.G.K1 Factors affecting VMC.
PA.IX.G.K2 VMC (red line) and VYSE (blue line).
PA.IX.G.K3 How to identify, verify, feather, and secure an inoperative engine.
PA.IX.G.K4 Importance of drag reduction, to include propeller feathering, gear and flap retraction, and
the manufacturer’s recommended flight control input and its relation to zero sideslip.
PA.IX.G.K5 Applicant responsibilities during simulated feathering.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.IX.G.R1 Failure to plan for engine failure inflight or during an approach.
PA.IX.G.R2 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.IX.G.R3 Improper airplane configuration.
PA.IX.G.R4 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.IX.G.R5 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.IX.G.R6 Possible single-engine go-around.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.IX.G.S1 Promptly recognize an engine failure and maintain positive airplane control.
PA.IX.G.S2
Set the engine controls, reduce drag, identify and verify the inoperative engine, and
simulate feathering of the propeller on the inoperative engine. (Evaluator should then
establish zero thrust on the inoperative engine).
PA.IX.G.S3 Use flight controls in the proper combination as recommended by the manufacturer or as
required to maintain best performance, and trim as required.
PA.IX.G.S4 Follow the manufacturer’s recommended emergency procedures.
PA.IX.G.S5 Monitor the operating engine and make adjustments as necessary.
PA.IX.G.S6 Maintain the manufacturer’s recommended approach airspeed +10/-5 knots, in the
landing configuration with a stabilized approach, until landing is assured.
PA.IX.G.S7 Make smooth, timely, and correct control application during round out and touchdown.
PA.IX.G.S8 Touch down on the first one-third of available runway/landing surface, with no drift, and
the airplane’s longitudinal axis aligned with and over the runway center or landing path.
PA.IX.G.S9 Maintain directional control and appropriate crosswind correction throughout the approach
and landing.
PA.IX.G.S10 Complete the appropriate checklist.58
X. Multiengine Operations
Task A. Maneuvering with One Engine Inoperative (AMEL, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; FAA-P-8740-66; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with maneuvering with one engine inoperative.
Note: See Appendix 6: Safety of Flight and Appendix 7: Aircraft, Equipment, and
Operational Requirements & Limitations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.X.A.K1 Factors affecting VMC.
PA.X.A.K2 VMC (red line) and VYSE (blue line).
PA.X.A.K3 How to identify, verify, feather, and secure an inoperative engine.
PA.X.A.K4 Importance of drag reduction, to include propeller feathering, gear and flap retraction, the
manufacturer’s recommended flight control input and its relation to zero sideslip.
PA.X.A.K5 Feathering, securing, unfeathering, and restarting.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.X.A.R1 Failure to plan for engine failure during flight.
PA.X.A.R2 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.X.A.R3 Improper airplane configuration.
PA.X.A.R4 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.X.A.R5 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.X.A.S1 Recognize an engine failure, maintain control, use manufacturer’s memory item
procedures, and utilize appropriate emergency procedures.
PA.X.A.S2 Set the engine controls, identify and verify the inoperative engine, and feather the
appropriate propeller.
PA.X.A.S3 Use flight controls in the proper combination as recommended by the manufacturer, or as
required to maintain best performance, and trim as required.
PA.X.A.S4 Attempt to determine and resolve the reason for the engine failure.
PA.X.A.S5 Secure the inoperative engine and monitor the operating engine and make necessary
adjustments.
PA.X.A.S6 Restart the inoperative engine using manufacturer’s restart procedures.
PA.X.A.S7 Maintain altitude ±100 feet or a minimum sink rate if applicable, airspeed ±10 knots, and
headings ±10°.
PA.X.A.S8 Complete the appropriate checklist.X. Multiengine Operations
59
Task B. VMC Demonstration (AMEL, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; FAA-P-8740-66; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with a VMC demonstration.
Note: See Appendix 6: Safety of Flight and Appendix 7: Aircraft, Equipment, and
Operational Requirements & Limitations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.X.B.K1 Factors affecting VMC and how VMC differs from stall speed (VS).
PA.X.B.K2 VMC (red line), VYSE (blue line), and VSSE (safe single-engine speed).
PA.X.B.K3 Cause of loss of directional control at airspeeds below VMC.
PA.X.B.K4 Proper procedures for maneuver entry and safe recovery.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.X.B.R1 Improper airplane configuration.
PA.X.B.R2 Maneuvering with one engine inoperative.
PA.X.B.R3 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.X.B.S1 Configure the airplane in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations, in the
absence of the manufacturer’s recommendations, then at VSSE/VYSE, as appropriate, and:
PA.X.B.S1a a. Landing gear retracted
PA.X.B.S1b b. Flaps set for takeoff
PA.X.B.S1c c. Cowl flaps set for takeoff
PA.X.B.S1d d. Trim set for takeoff
PA.X.B.S1e e. Propellers set for high RPM
PA.X.B.S1f f. Power on critical engine reduced to idle and propeller windmilling
PA.X.B.S1g g. Power on operating engine set to takeoff or maximum available power
PA.X.B.S2 Establish a single-engine climb attitude with the airspeed at approximately 10 knots
above VSSE.
PA.X.B.S3 Establish a bank angle not to exceed 5° toward the operating engine, as required for best
performance and controllability.
PA.X.B.S4
Increase the pitch attitude slowly to reduce the airspeed at approximately 1 knot per
second while applying rudder pressure to maintain directional control until full rudder is
applied.
PA.X.B.S5 Recognize indications of loss of directional control, stall warning, or buffet.
PA.X.B.S6
Recover promptly by simultaneously reducing power sufficiently on the operating engine,
decreasing the angle of attack as necessary to regain airspeed and directional control,
and without adding power on the simulated failed engine.
PA.X.B.S7 Recover within 20° of entry heading.
PA.X.B.S8 Advance power smoothly on the operating engine and accelerate to VSSE/VYSE, as
appropriate, +10/-5 knots during recovery.X. Multiengine Operations
60
Task C. One Engine Inoperative (Simulated) (solely by Reference to Instruments) During
Straight-and-Level Flight and Turns (AMEL, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; FAA-P-8740-66; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with flight solely by reference to instruments with one engine inoperative.
Note: See Appendix 6: Safety of Flight and Appendix 7: Aircraft, Equipment, and
Operational Requirements & Limitations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.X.C.K1 Procedures used if engine failure occurs during straight-and-level flight and turns while on
instruments.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.X.C.R1 Failure to identify the inoperative engine.
PA.X.C.R2 Inability to climb or maintain altitude with an inoperative engine.
PA.X.C.R3 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.X.C.R4 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.X.C.R5 Fuel management during single-engine operation.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.X.C.S1 Promptly recognize an engine failure and maintain positive airplane control.
PA.X.C.S2
Set the engine controls, reduce drag, identify and verify the inoperative engine, and
simulate feathering of the propeller on the inoperative engine. (Evaluator should then
establish zero thrust on the inoperative engine.)
PA.X.C.S3 Establish the best engine-inoperative airspeed and trim the airplane.
PA.X.C.S4 Use flight controls in the proper combination as recommended by the manufacturer, or as
required to maintain best performance, and trim as required.
PA.X.C.S5 Verify the prescribed checklist procedures normally used for securing the inoperative
engine.
PA.X.C.S6 Attempt to determine and resolve the reason for the engine failure.
PA.X.C.S7 Monitor engine functions and make necessary adjustments.
PA.X.C.S8 Maintain the specified altitude ±100 feet or minimum sink rate if applicable, airspeed ±10
knots, and the specified heading ±10°.
PA.X.C.S9 Assess the airplane’s performance capability and decide an appropriate action to ensure
a safe landing.
PA.X.C.S10 Avoid loss of airplane control or attempted flight contrary to the engine-inoperative
operating limitations of the airplane.
PA.X.C.S11 Utilize SRM.X. Multiengine Operations
61
Task D. Instrument Approach and Landing with an Inoperative Engine (Simulated) (solely
by Reference to Instruments) (AMEL, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; FAA-P-8740-66; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with executing a published instrument approach solely by reference to
instruments with one engine inoperative.
Note: See Appendix 6: Safety of Flight and Appendix 7: Aircraft, Equipment, and
Operational Requirements & Limitations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.X.D.K1 Instrument approach procedures with one engine inoperative.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess, and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.X.D.R1 Failure to plan for engine failure during approach and landing.
PA.X.D.R2 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, wires, vehicles, vessels, persons,
and wildlife.
PA.X.D.R3 Improper airplane configuration.
PA.X.D.R4 Low altitude maneuvering including stall, spin, or CFIT.
PA.X.D.R5 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.X.D.R6 Performing a go-around/rejected landing with an engine failure.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.X.D.S1 Promptly recognize engine failure and maintain positive airplane control.
PA.X.D.S2
Set the engine controls, reduce drag, identify and verify the inoperative engine, and
simulate feathering of the propeller on the inoperative engine. (Evaluator should then
establish zero thrust on the inoperative engine).
PA.X.D.S3 Use flight controls in the proper combination as recommended by the manufacturer, or as
required to maintain best performance, and trim as required.
PA.X.D.S4 Follow the manufacturer’s recommended emergency procedures.
PA.X.D.S5 Monitor the operating engine and make adjustments as necessary.
PA.X.D.S6 Request and follow an actual or a simulated ATC clearance for an instrument approach.
PA.X.D.S7 Maintain altitude ±100 feet or minimum sink rate if applicable, airspeed ±10 knots, and
selected heading ±10°.
PA.X.D.S8
Establish a rate of descent that will ensure arrival at the MDA or DA/DH with the airplane
in a position from which a descent to a landing on the intended runway can be made,
either straight in or circling as appropriate.
PA.X.D.S9 On final approach segment, maintain vertical (as applicable) and lateral guidance within
¾-scale deflection.
PA.X.D.S10 Avoid loss of airplane control, or attempted flight contrary to the operating limitations of
the airplane.
PA.X.D.S11 Comply with the published criteria for the aircraft approach category if circling.
PA.X.D.S12 Execute a normal landing.
PA.X.D.S13 Complete the appropriate checklist.62
XI. Night Operations
Task A. Night Preparation
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3, FAA-H-8083-25; AIM; POH/AFM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with night operations.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.XI.A.K1 Physiological aspects of vision related to night flying.
PA.XI.A.K2 Lighting systems identifying airports, runways, taxiways and obstructions, as well as pilot
controlled lighting.
PA.XI.A.K3 Airplane equipment and lighting requirements for night operations.
PA.XI.A.K4 Personal equipment essential for night flight.
PA.XI.A.K5 Night orientation, navigation, and chart reading techniques.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.XI.A.R1 Collision hazards, to include aircraft, terrain, obstacles, and wires.
PA.XI.A.R2 Distractions, loss of situational awareness, or improper task management.
PA.XI.A.R3 Hazards specific to night flying.
Skills
N/A
Note: Not generally evaluated in flight. If the practical test is conducted at night, all ACS
Tasks are evaluated in that environment, thus there is no need for explicit Task
elements to exist here.63
XII. Postflight Procedures
Task A. After Landing, Parking and Securing (ASEL, AMEL)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-3; POH/AFM
Objective To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with after landing, parking, and securing procedures.
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.XII.A.K1 Airplane shutdown, securing, and postflight inspection.
PA.XII.A.K2 Documenting in-flight/postflight discrepancies.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.XII.A.R1 Inappropriate activities and distractions.
PA.XII.A.R2 Confirmation or expectation bias as related to taxi instructions.
PA.XII.A.R3 Airport specific security procedures.
PA.XII.A.R4 Disembarking passengers.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.XII.A.S1 Utilize runway incursion avoidance procedures.
PA.XII.A.S2 Park in an appropriate area, considering the safety of nearby persons and property.
PA.XII.A.S3 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.XII.A.S4 Conduct a postflight inspection and document discrepancies and servicing requirements,
if any.
PA.XII.A.S5 Secure the airplane.XII. Postflight Procedures
64
Task B. Seaplane Post-Landing Procedures (ASES, AMES)
References FAA-H-8083-2, FAA-H-8083-23; POH/AFM
Objective
To determine that the applicant exhibits satisfactory knowledge, risk management, and skills
associated with anchoring, docking, mooring, and ramping/beaching.
Note: The evaluator must select at least one after-landing procedure (anchoring, docking
and mooring, or ramping/beaching).
Knowledge The applicant demonstrates understanding of:
PA.XII.B.K1 Mooring.
PA.XII.B.K2 Docking.
PA.XII.B.K3 Anchoring.
PA.XII.B.K4 Beaching/ramping.
PA.XII.B.K5 Postflight inspection, recording of in-flight/postflight discrepancies.
Risk
Management The applicant demonstrates the ability to identify, assess and mitigate risks, encompassing:
PA.XII.B.R1 Inappropriate activities and distractions.
PA.XII.B.R2 Confirmation or expectation bias as related to taxi instructions.
PA.XII.B.R3 Seaplane base specific security procedures, if applicable.
PA.XII.B.R4 Disembarking passengers.
Skills The applicant demonstrates the ability to:
PA.XII.B.S1
If anchoring, select a suitable area considering seaplane movement, water depth, tide,
wind, and weather changes. Use an adequate number of anchors and lines of sufficient
strength and length to ensure the seaplane’s security.
PA.XII.B.S2 If not anchoring, approach the dock/mooring buoy or beach/ramp in the proper direction
and at a safe speed, considering water depth, tide, current, and wind.
PA.XII.B.S3 Complete the appropriate checklist.
PA.XII.B.S4 Conduct a postflight inspection and document discrepancies and servicing requirements, if
any.
PA.XII.B.S5
Secure the seaplane considering the effect of wind, waves, and changes in water level,
or comply with applicable after landing, parking and securing if operating an amphibious
airplane on land.
